8 November 2016Government s fifth National Imbizo Focus Week, 7-13 November 2016 opened today, following the theme Together we move South Africa forward: Our future make it work . All South Africans are encouraged to actively participate in the Imbizo events and engage with government. An informed and active citizenry is critical towards delivering the National Development Plan (NDP) Vision 2030. The NDP serves as a blueprint for the work that needs to be done to achieve a prosperous society for our country. At the opening of Imbizo Focus Week today, the President of the Republic of South Africa, Mr Jacob Zuma handed over a fully equipped computer laboratory to the Marhulana Primary School in Tembisa, Ekurhuleni, Gauteng Province. The President went back to fulfil the commitment he made in July 2016 at the Mandela Day commemorations to equip the school with computers. The use of ICTs in education is increasingly becoming an important medium for complementing the delivery of the curriculum. The President was accompanied by the Minister of Basic Education, Ms Angie Motshekga and the Ambassador of China in South Africa H.E. Mr. Tian Xuejun.Minister of Trade and Industry, Dr Rob Davies and the Eastern Cape Premier, Mr Phumulo Masualle launched the first phase of the Komani Industrial Park revitalisation in Queenstown, Eastern Cape Province. The launch marked the completion of the 1st phase of the project which covers security upgrading of the industrial park. R22.5m has been invested in the revitalization of the Komani Industrial Park. The Revitalisation of Industrial Parks Programme is creating much needed jobs in and around townships and rural communities. The Minister of Transport, Ms Dipuo Peters presided over the official handover of the Notwane Bridge a linking South Africa and Botswana. This construction of the road and bridge cost R78.5 million, and 51 full time jobs were created over the 23 month contract period. The Notwane Bridge will open up economic opportunities and lead to a safer travel experience for commuters within the region.The Minister of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Mr David van Rooyan held a Sector Imbizo with various role-players in Garankuwa as part of the Local Economic Development Programme which aims to ensure that municipalities are sustainable. The team visited the Garankuwa Eco-Furniture factory. This project aims to helps create job opportunities, fight poverty and develop entrepreneurship skills. The Deputy Minister of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, Mr Obed Bapela visited the Agri-Hub site at Makapanstad in the North-West Province. Agri-Hubs are a key component of Agri-Parks, and the goals of this programme are to transform the rural economy. Government has allocated a total of R2 billion annually for the establishment of Agri-Parks around the country. The Deputy Minister addressed the community and the local traditional leaders during the event. NB: The full schedule of the upcoming events is available on: http://www.gov.za/sites/www.gov.za/files/speech_docs/Imbizo%20Focus%20We... For updates follow us on Twitter: @GovernmentZA #ImbizoWeek. Enquires: Donald Liphoko Cell: 082 901 0766Issued by Government Communication and Information System (GCIS)