 9 November 2016The Imbizo Focus Week, 7-13 November 2016 is held under the theme Together we move South Africa forward: Our future make it work . The core priorities of the NDP are to reduce poverty, unemployment and inequality. The implementation levers of the NDP encompass amongst others education, economic growth and employment, skills development, infrastructure, rural development, and social protection.In giving expression to these implementation levers, the Deputy Minister of Tourism will lead an Imbizo event in the Eastern Cape at Graaff-Reinet on the 10 November 2016 focusing on promoting domestic tourism and the hospitality industry as one of the key job drivers. The event will focus on job creation and enterprise development. Minister of Small Business Development will host an Imbizo in KwaZulu-Natal at Umuziwabantu, Kwa-Jali, Ward 10 for the Ulimo 12 Cooperatives First Harvest and Cooperatives Imbizo and a Youth SMME and Cooperative Imbizo in the Eastern Cape at Mbhashe, Willowvale Sports Hall respectively as part of unlocking the potential of SMMEs. Deputy Minister of Transport will be in Mpumalanga at Bohlabela for the R40 Road Inspection and handing over ceremony of basic essentials to Bushbuckridge Old Age Center as part of improving the road infrastructure and providing social support to the civic organisations. Deputy Minister of Higher Education and Training will be in the Western Cape at the NSFAS building for a walkabout of the facility and to join the call centre team to receive and respond to caller enquiries and calling upon learners to submit their 2017 NSFAS applications before applications close on 30 November 2016. This visit forms part of the Deputy Minister s monitoring work on various entities of the Department of Higher Education and Training. Minister and the Deputy Minister of Transport will host the inaugural Transport Sector Broad-Based Black Economic Empowerment (B-BBEE) Charter Council Indaba at Orlando Stadium in Soweto from the 10th to 12th November 2016. The Transport Sector B-BBEE Indaba will serve as a platform to, amongst others, advance the radical economic transformation and empowerment of black people including youth, women and people with disabilities. The Transport Sector B-BBEE Indaba will be held under the theme: Sekunjalo/Ke Nako/Now is the Time: Accelerating Transformation for Black Economic Empowerment .Government calls on community members to use this opportunity to engage with leaders about programmes to resolve the challenges of unemployment, poverty and inequality in terms of the NDP, what it means for every South African and how we plan to achieve a better life for all. The NDP is our future, let s make it work to build the South Africa we all want to live in. Follow @GovernmentZA on twitter for updates, the official hashtag for the campaign is #ImbizoWeek.Enquiries: Michael Currin Cell: 082 462 7896Issued by Government Communication and Information Systems (GCIS)